- Now that we've covered
some basics of matrices,
we're going to get to
some more interesting
and unfortunately more
complicated operations.
Let me give you a little piece of advice
when going through this entire course.
Do not rush through it.
It's not a race.
So if you're not totally
comfortable with lesson 1.1,
maybe you review it
before you move into 1.2.
And that should hold for all the lessons
throughout this course.
Get really comfortable with one thing,
and then the next thing is
going to be a lot easier.
Now, this is an interesting topic,
the determinant of a matrix.
Frankly, when I teach this to students,
at universities and other settings,
most people master the
process relatively easy.
But what gets you is you wonder why,
"Okay, I did all this.
What can I do with it?"
Unfortunately, we're going
to have to set the why
to one side.
We're going to see uses of determinants
quite frequently later on.
For now, let's just
understand how to get it.
The determinant of a matrix is denoted
by the two vertical lines
around whatever letter is
representing the matrix,
in this case A.
So if I have a two by
two matrix, A, B, C, D,
the determinant is found by
simply multiplying A times D
minus B times C.
And here at the bottom we have
a concrete example of that.
So the determinant of the
matrix of the bottom is one.
Now, I'm certain all of
you easily grasp that
and could calculate that fairly easy
for any two by two matrix.
But you may be wondering why.
Again, keep that to one
side for just a moment.
It gets a bit more complex
when we start talking
about three by three matrices.
There are lots of formulas out there,
the Laplace formula,
the Leibniz formula, the Sarrus' scheme,
all of them operate in a different way,
but end up getting the same determinant.
So what are determinants used for?
First of all, they're used to calculate
eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Now, that might bring up more
questions than it answered.
We're going to use
eigenvalues and eigenvectors
throughout this course,
so you're going to get
very comfortable with them.
So don't worry about that just yet.
It can also be used to determine
if the matrix has an inverse.
Determinants can also
be used in ascertaining
whether or not a system of n equations
in n unknowns has a solution.
Put another way,
when you use matrices in linear algebra
for their original purpose,
solving systems of linear equations,
it can be a bit of a task to solve that.
Well, let's first find out
if there is a solution of
n equations and n unknowns
before we waste time trying to find it.
It may be that there is no solution.
Now, as I said, there are
lots of different methods
for calculating the determinant
of a three by three matrix.
We're going to use just one.
Now, for those of you
who have had exposure
to linear algebra,
you might have used a
different method than this.
But I would suggest when we
get to a concrete example,
you compare our method to the
method you previously learned,
and I believe you'll find they
both give the same answer.
What we basically do is we
divide the three by three matrix
into three different two by two matrices.
We take the lower right hand corner,
you see that on the left,
the lower left hand corner
you see on the far right,
and in the middle we take
basically the far left bottom two
and the far right bottom two,
and we make those into
two by two matrices.
And then we go through them
calculating the determinant of each one
and using a little addition,
subtraction to combine those.
Now, later you'll see
some concrete examples.
Before we get to that, another topic
you're going to see a lot, a dot product.
Now, we've used the term vector a lot
and I think you know what it means,
but let's make sure you do.
A vector is basically a
matrix that's a single row
or single column.
Now, there's some interesting properties
of these vectors.
Like the determinant of a square matrix
that gives us information,
the dot product of two vectors
gives us some information.
Basically, the dot product is taking
the elements of the two vectors,
multiplying them together,
and adding up those sums.
As you see here, I first
multiply one times three
then two times two, then one times one
and I calculate the final
answer, which is eight.
So the dot product of
these two vectors is eight.
Now, if two vectors are orthogonal,
that means they're
perpendicular to each other,
they come together like this,
and the unit length is one,
we call those orthonormal.
That's going to show up a lot
in quantum-based algorithms.
Now, the dot product is
essentially giving you
a single number from two vectors.
Basically, we look at two matrices,
and produce a single number
and there's a lot of
practical uses for that.
I'll give you one right now.
If I take vectors X and
Y, and we're called,
we're looking at them as vectors,
but we could have plotted them out
on a Cartesian coordinate system.
Well, it turns out that
the cosine of the angle
between those two vectors
is the dot product
divided by the length of
X times the length of Y.
If the two dot product is zero,
then the two vectors are
actually perpendicular.
Remember I said a moment ago,
we're looking sometimes for vectors
that are orthogonal or perpendicular.
Well, if their dot product is zero
I already know that they're
perpendicular or orthogonal
and I don't have to
plot it out on a graph.
I know it immediately
based on the dot product.
Now, tensor product is
a little more complex.
We're not going to get a
single number out of it,
we're going going to get a vector.
But what we do is we essentially multiply
every single element in the first vector
times every single element
in the second vector.
So it looks something like this.
We end up with a new
vector that's actually
a length equal to the
two separate vectors.
This is called a tensor product.